Today, in this presentation, I would like to share with you how to scale Shiny to thousands
of users. My name is Damian Rodziewicz, and I'm one of the founders of Appsilon. I'm also
a technical person, so I work hands-on on a lot of projects that we have. That's why
I have first-hand experience in scaling Shiny applications. Be sure to leave your questions.
I'd be happy to discuss them, and you can contact me later if you have any further questions
to discuss. So, let me start with a very simple success story that I keep seeing over and
over again, and I'm really excited about this. Thanks to Shiny, you and your team are able
to build a successful app very quickly. Sometimes, it is just a matter of days. You start having
your first clients, customers, users. Very often, these are internal users in your own
company. You're helping them understand better their process and go through the process
much faster. Suddenly, you have more users that are using your application. Very often,
we see that people who start using your Shiny application love it from the first day, because
the fact is that, thanks to Shiny, you are able to implement new features very fast.
Shiny is super flexible. You just make the changes on the go. Everyone loves the application,
and it does exactly what people want to do, because this is a dedicated software that
you built for them. Suddenly, you realize that you have a huge amount of users that
are using your application, and it starts to become a problem, because some will report
to you that your application is actually slow, or some will tell you that they are blocked
and they cannot click around your application. This is usually when you decide to seek for
the solution. These are usually the questions that we are asked. How to make my app faster?
How to scale my Shiny application? How to build a scalable Shiny enterprise application?
One thing that I would like you to first think about is the fact that most of those questions
usually start with a question, how? We are very used to trying to find the solution as
fast as possible. We want to find good tips and tricks. We want to understand what's going
on and just apply new techniques. But there are two other questions that are even more
important that you should be asking. The first one is why, and the second one is what. Let
me share with you a quick story. There was a client that had their car broken down, and
they went to the mechanic. The mechanic looked at the car. They realized that the engine
is broken. They took the hammer and just smashed the engine. Then, suddenly, the engine started
working again, and the client asked, okay, that's awesome. How much do I pay for this
simple service? The mechanic says, you're going to pay $100. The client wasn't happy
about it, and they asked for the invoice to see why exactly hitting an engine with a hammer
actually costs $100. These are the contents of the invoice. The $1 for just hitting an
engine with the hammer, but the $99 is because the mechanic understands why the engine is
broken, understands what the root cause is, and then knows what exactly to do to get rid
of this root cause. Now, before I jump into why, which I think is the most fundamental
question that you should be asking, let's talk about what so that you have the whole
context of what we usually do when we want to scale the Shiny application. When you think
about scaling Shiny, there are two groups of actions that you can make. The first one
is called vertical scaling, and this is increasing the amount of users for one machine. You can
do it in two ways. The first one is just adding more resources to your machine, so add more
CPU, add more memory. The second way of vertical scaling is making your Shiny application leaner,
so allowing more users to use it. The second group is horizontal scaling, which is just
adding more machines. To put it in this context, the first two are actually fairly simple.
I know I'm very often asked about how to scale Shiny horizontally, how to have multiple servers
connect. Let me tell you this. This is actually very, very simple. I'm going to share with
you resources at the end of this presentation so that you can take a look at yourself on
the contents. Basically, the first simple step that some people usually do is just ask
the DevOps IT if they can increase the size of the server. They add memory, they add CPU.
This right away gives you more users that can use your application. Of course, you have
to pay for that. Very often, it is difficult to find additional budget for increasing the
machine, especially if suddenly you have 10 times as much users and you need a really,
really big machine then. The second step that you can do is talk to DevOps IT and ask them
to add more servers. This is as simple as just spinning up additional virtual machines
if you are using cloud or a little bit more complex if you have physical machines that
you have to turn on and configure. The good news is that RStudio Connect is super easy
to configure. There are just simple steps that you need to go through. Suddenly, all
of your machines are going to run RStudio Connect. All of them are going to run your
application. The only thing it costs you is actually real money for the machines.
Now, the third thing that you can do is the most difficult one and the one that requires
you to understand why the application might be slow. This is for you as an R Shiny engineer
to find the bottlenecks and to understand what slows the application down and to make
the application leaner. There are three main things that you can do. Of course, there is
much more techniques that you can apply, but the key parts are first, to leverage the front
end, to use JavaScript. As you saw from the previous presentations, it's not that complex
and sometimes you don't even need to understand the JavaScript. If you don't use server to
generate HTML and send it back to you when you make changes, it already saves you a very
valuable time of your processor. The second one is to extract computations. This also
decreases the CPU usage of your application. If your application is doing something heavily,
think about a way to extract those computations somewhere else to leverage the ability to
use external services and not put all of the pressure on your Shiny application server.
The third one, which is I think the most commonly used, is to just use a database. I have heard
a huge amount of success stories when someone just decided to move all of his data or her
data into the database and suddenly the application was easily scalable up to hundreds or thousands
of users. This gives you two advantages, which is less memory usage and less CPU usage.
This is more or less what you need to do to scale your Shiny application. Now, I would
like you to fully understand why we actually have to do this, because when you think about
it, RStudio Connect is a great product that allows you to scale Shiny applications up
to tens of thousands of users. You might have seen Sean Loop's video where he shows how
this is possible. Also, Shiny is very fast on your local machine when you just run it.
Why should it be slower for others when there is just more people using it? Let me tell
you a story based on a very simple application. If you take a look at the code, this is the
most simple one that you can write. There is a slider and there is a text output. The
only thing that the server does here is the server gets the input slider value whenever
it changes and sends the value back as output text. Now, what happens behind the scenes
when you send such application to the server? First thing when the user connects to the
server is the browser is going to download HTML that is generated by your UI function,
CSS, JavaScript, all the static files like images. At the same time, server is going
to create a separate process for you so that you can start your Shiny session there and
you can execute the R code. Now, the thing about processes is that R is single-threaded
and you can specify how many users you want to have for one process, but you need to realize
that if there are two users that have the same process assigned and R is single-threaded,
then when one process does something, then the other user cannot actually do anything.
I will show you this in a moment, but what you should understand here is that the server
creates a process or adds the user to already existing process to handle all of the operations
on your reactive graph. Now, the second thing that happens is the browser creates a connection
through WebSockets, and through WebSockets, there are going to be data and information
being sent back and forth. WebSockets are slightly different than the typical REST API that you know
because they allow you to have a bidirectional communication, and that's why the server can
actually push some messages to the browser, which is not that possible with typical applications
that have REST API. So, the second step is the browser actually binds the Shiny inputs and
outputs, and it starts the WebSocket connection with the server. Now, let's say that you are
moving the slider and you set the slider to five. The browser is going to send this value to the
server. The server is going to check this value, trigger the reactive computation, and return
the resulting value. So, in our example, it is just going to respond to the browser that text
is five. Now, coming back to Pedro's presentation, if instead of just returning a simple value,
we returned an updated widget, then you would actually have to send the whole HTML if you don't
use the update function that Pedro was talking about. If you used update function, then the
browser is smart. The browser receives only the data that has changed, and on the JavaScript part,
it's going to update the HTML. So, this is a huge value already by using the update functions.
Now, when it comes to the browser and the server, after all of the computations are done,
the browser is just waiting for another signal either from the user or from the server. Now,
this is a very simple example. Now, let's take a look what happens when you actually start doing
some difficult computations. Instead of just returning the value, I'm going to perform a long
complex CPU operation based on the input slider value. Now, the same thing that happens,
you send the value through the web sockets to the server, and within that process that is started
for you, the process is just calculating the long-running computation that you required him to
do. And the problem is that your user no longer is able to make any actions within the application.
Everything is gray. It is waiting for the output. And at the same time, new users or old users that
have already been using this process also cannot interact with the server and have to wait
for this computation to finish. And this is one of the main issues that we see in applications.
When there is plenty of complex computations happening for one users, the other users are
blocked or the CPU usage is so high that the other users are seeing that things are going
slower for them. So, in order to get rid of this problem, you can use multiple solutions. First one,
extract some computations to the database. I will show you this in a moment. Second one,
you can use Shiny Promises, which is a great package by Joe Chang that allows you to
move those computations to a completely new process and makes Shiny free from any computation.
You can use Shiny Worker, which is our package for similar computations. Or you can simply move
some of the computations to the JavaScript to the front end. Now, let's talk about the database.
This is the second biggest problem that I see in applications. You might create a successful
application that works locally fine. But in fact, the application, in order to run,
loads a lot of data into memory. And we need to realize that our computers are similar to
what we have as servers. They have their own RAM. They have their own CPU. And RAM usually is around
16, 32 gigabytes. It's not a lot. If in your application, you read one gigabyte of data,
and then you filter this data to do some actions in the application, let's see what happens in the
real life. You can see a machine here. You can see five users that are connected to RStudio Connect.
And in this configuration, we create one process for every two users that access our application.
This is configurable. This is easy to configure. But for this purpose, let's assume that we have
two users per one process. Right now, if you have five users, you already have three gigabytes of
data being loaded, because every process is like a separate box that contains everything that you
need to trigger all of that to compute everything. And now, when you have, for example, 13 users,
suddenly, you need to have seven processes and use seven gigabytes. Let's see if you have 26
users. It already uses up 14 gigabytes of data. And when you think about it, 26 users is not a lot.
So you should be very aware of the fact that the usage of your memory is going to multiply by the
amount of users that you have in your application. And you should try to avoid loading too much data
into memory. What you can do instead is to set up a separate database. And it doesn't have to be a
separate SQL server. It could be files on your drive, on the machine's drive, that are accessed
in a different way than just loading all of that into memory. You can check out Search Online for
Christian Ygras' talk about different possible ways of reading data. And even Uber is having
a separate package that basically reads a lot of files, the terabytes of data that you can search.
This is just files. But when you have an external database, that database contains this one gigabyte.
And you just execute a filter, a query, and you get the result. And here, you have two gains.
First one is, of course, the fact that you don't have to load the data into memory. But the second
one also is the fact that sometimes such filtering is even faster because the database is specially
indexed to allow you to make the queries very fast. So just to recap, when you have a successful
Shiny application, most likely from the start, because it is a prototype, it is going to look
like this. There is a server. There is UI. A lot of communication through the web sockets. And the
server is doing a lot of computations by themselves. The first thing to do, try to leverage
JavaScript. Try to move some computations to the browser. The second part, use external server. You
can use Plumber API to create a separate server that is going to do the computations for you. And
then just ping the main server when the computations are done. You can use the database, which is the
simplest way of already giving you a lot of edge. And then you can just scale horizontally by adding
the servers with your IT team. Now, the other way to think about it is, you don't want your
application to be a slow chess player. You want your application to be the Forrest Gump of table
tennis. You want it to just take the ball and give it back right away. When the application,
when the front-end is asking for something, you just respond very quickly, hey, yeah, okay, I'm
going to do this. And if front-end knows that something is triggered, then you just delegate
your job somewhere else. And once the job is done, you let front-end know that something has changed.
This is similar to the comparison that I have in my head. You don't want, for example, your mother
to come into your room and tell you, hey, now you have to do your homework, and I'm going to stand
here and wait until you're finished. You want to just say, hey, do the homework, and I will be back
or let me know when you're finished. So, this is the kind of way you want to structure your Shiny
application. Now, to sum it up, I would like to tell you also how to do this. There is plenty of
resources that you can reach. We will share the slides with you, so we can click through those
things and see different articles. There is a separate section for leveraging front-end. There
is a very nice book about JavaScript for R, and there is a section for extracting computations,
the Shiny Worker Package, Shiny Promises Package, Plumber API, great resources that you can just
jump into and start working with. For using a database, I recommend reading the main article
from RStudio that actually goes through every step that you need to have the database in your
application. And to scale vertically and horizontally, there is a very nice page about
scaling and performance tuning in RStudio Connect that gives you an overview of all of
the configuration options, especially how many users you use per the process. And there is a
separate doc about high availability, how to scale your application horizontally, how to add additional
servers. As I said, this is really simple. Don't worry about it. Just try it. You can even log
into AWS or Google Cloud, set up three virtual machines, install RStudio Connect, and see how
easy it is to configure. That is all from me. Thank you very much. Hope this is useful, and
I'm looking forward to the next talk by Marek and Filip.